>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, OCTOBER 4: ONE OF
AMERICA’S TOP HEALTH EXPERTS
TALKS TO US ABOUT COMBATING
EBOLA IN THIS COUNTRY; PRIME
MINISTER DAVID CAMERON VOWS
REVENGE FOR THE BEHEADING OF A
BRITISH AID WORKER BY ISIS
MILITANTS; AND THE BIG BUSINESS
OF YOUNG ADULT LITERATURE.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
U.S. HEALTH OFFICIALS SAID TODAY
THEY HAVE FIELDED INQUIRIES
ABOUT 100 SUSPECTED CASES OF
EBOLA SINCE THE FIRST CASE IN
THE UNITED STATES WAS CONFIRMED
IN DALLAS, BUT THAT NO NEW
INFECTIONS HAVE BEEN IDENTIFIED.
THIS AFTERNOON, OFFICIALS FROM
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
RACED TO NEWARK AIRPORT TO MEET
A PLANE THAT HAD LANDED FROM
BRUSSELS.
TWO PASSENGERS BELIEVED TO BE
FROM LIBERIA BECAME ILL DURING
THE FLIGHT.
LATER, HEALTH OFFICIALS SAID THE
TWO APPARENTLY DO NOT HAVE
EBOLA.
ANOTHER SIMILAR SCARE WAS
REPORTED IN WEST FLORIDA TODAY.
AND THOSE TWO SUSPECTED CASES IN
THE WASHINGTON, D.C., AREA
TURNED OUT NOT TO BE EBOLA,
EITHER.
BUT THOMAS ERIC DUNCAN, THE
LIBERIAN MAN WHO ON THURSDAY
BECAME THE FIRST PERSON IN THE
U.S. WITH EBOLA, TODAY WAS
DOWNGRADED FROM SERIOUS TO
CRITICAL CONDITION.
JOINING US NOW FROM WASHINGTON
IS ONE OF THE NATION’S TOP
HEALTH EXPERTS.
DR. ANTHONY FAUCI IS THE
DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL
INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND
INFECTIOUS DISEASES.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN SAYING
THAT THEY ARE PREPARED, THAT
THEY’VE BEEN SENDING OUT
INFORMATION FOR WEEKS.
IS THERE IN THAT INFORMATION A
CHECKLIST FOR HOSPITALS TO GO
THROUGH ON WHAT TO DO IF SOMEONE
WALKS INTO THEIR EMERGENCY ROOM
AND HAS THESE SYMPTOMS, WITH
THIS TRAVEL HISTORY?
>> INDEED, THERE IS.
THERE IS A CERTAIN THING CALLED
THE HAN- H-A-N-- THE HEALTH
ALERT NETWORK.
THE C.D.C. HAS BEEN SENDING OUT
SEVERAL OF THESE OVER THE LAST
WEEKS TO MONTHS TO UNDERSCORE
SEVERAL THINGS.
AND THE ONE THAT’S MOST RELEVANT
TO WHAT WE’RE TALKING ABOUT
TODAY IS THE SPECIFIC ALERT THAT
IF SOMEONE COMES INTO AN
EMERGENCY ROOM OR A CLINIC WITH
SYMPTOMS THAT ARE SUGGESTIVE
OF EBOLA, IT’S IMPORTANT THAT
YOU TAKE A TRAVEL HISTORY.
IF A PERSON TELL YOU THAT
THEY’VE RECENTLY TRAVELED TO
WEST AFRICA AND HAVE COME BACK,
THAT YOU THEN TREAT THEM IN A
WAY THAT KEEPS THEM TO BE
OBSERVED BEFORE YOU RULE OUT THE
POSSIBILITY THAT THEY HAVE
EBOLA.
SO, THAT HAS BEEN GIVEN IN
INSTRUCTIONS AND ALERTS NOW FOR
A CONSIDERABLE PERIOD OF TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: IS IT JUST A
MATTER THAT SOME OF THESE
HOSPITALS JUST DID NOT PAY
ATTENTION TO?
BECAUSE WHY DID THE CASE IN
DALLAS TURN OUT THE WAY THAT IT
DID IF THE HOSPITALS HAD THIS
INFORMATION?
>> WELL, THEY CERTAINLY HAD THE
INFORMATION, AND WE JUST HAVE TO
RECOGNIZE IT FOR WHAT IT IS AND
WHAT IT WAS.
IT WAS A MISSTEP.
IT SHOULD NOT HAVE HAPPENED.
THERE’S NO EXCUSE.
BUT HOPEFULLY, RATHER THAN
HAVING ANY BLAME GAME, WE WOULD
LOOK FORWARD AND MAKE THIS A
LESSONS LEARNED, THAT WE REALLY
HAVE TO PAY ATTENTION TO THE
C.D.C. ALERTS.
AND I THINK PART OF THE POSITIVE
SPIN-OFF OF ALL THE PUBLICITY
THAT THE DALLAS CASE IS GETTING
IS THE FACT THAT EMERGENCY ROOM
AND CLINIC PHYSICIANS THROUGHOUT
THE COUNTRY ARE NOW ACUTELY
AWARE OF THIS MISSTEP.
AND I CAN GUARANTEE YOU, IF
SOMEONE COMES INTO A CLINIC NOW
WITH SYMPTOMS COMPATIBLE WITH
EBOLA AND GETS ASKED BY A
PHYSICIAN, "ARE YOU FROM WEST
AFRICA?," THAT EVERY PHYSICIAN
IS GOING TO ASK THAT QUESTION.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
GOVERNMENT’S ROLE IN HELPING
THOSE JUST BEYOND THE HOSPITAL?
SAY, FOR EXAMPLE, THE FIRST
RESPONDERS; IF SOMEONE IS IN AN
AMBULANCE, THEY ARE RESPONDING
TO A CALL WITH SOMEONE WHO MIGHT
HAVE FLU-LIKE SYMPTOMS OR
OTHERWISE.
>> WELL, AGAIN, THERE’S
INFECTION CONTROL AND PROTECTIVE
MECHANISMS FOR A LOT OF
DIFFERENT DISEASES, NOT ONLY
EBOLA.
BUT WHEN THERE IS A SUSPICION OF
EBOLA, ONE SHOULD GO INTO WHAT
WE CALL THE C.D.C. PROTOCOLS
ABOUT PROTECTION OF THE HEALTH
CARE WORKER.
NOW, ONE OF THE IMPORTANT THINGS
THAT WE NEED TO EMPHASIZE IS
THAT WHEN SOMEONE IS IDENTIFIED
AS EITHER WITH EBOLA SYMPTOMS
PARTICULARLY-- LET’S TAKE THE
CASE IN DALLAS-- ONCE YOU
ESTABLISH A CASE OF EBOLA, THE
IMPORTANT PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURE
TO PREVENT AN OUTBREAK IS THE
CONTACT TRACING THAT IS
CURRENTLY GOING ON IN DALLAS.
BECAUSE, HISTORICALLY, FOR THE
38 YEARS NOW THAT WE HAVE
EXPERIENCE WITH DEALING WITH
EBOLA ESSENTIALLY IN CENTRAL AND
SOUTHERN AFRICA, IS THAT WHEN
YOU GET THE CONTACTS UNDER
OBSERVATION AND OBSERVE THEM FOR
THE PERIOD OF TIME, WHICH IS 21
DAYS, SO THAT YOU COULD RULE OUT
WHETHER OR NOT THEY DO OR DO NOT
HAVE EBOLA, THAT’S THE WAY YOU
PREVENT AN OUTBREAK.
AND THAT’S THE REASON WHY,
DESPITE THE INITIAL MISSTEP, WE
FEEL THAT WE HAVE THE HEALTH
CARE INFRASTRUCTURE TO BE ABLE
TO IMPLEMENT THAT AND PREVENT AN
OUTBREAK HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, WHAT’S THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT’S ROLE IN
TRYING TO COORDINATE THOSE OTHER
RESOURCES BEYOND THE HOSPITALS
IN TERMS OF THE LOCAL
AUTHORITIES?
THERE SEEMS TO BE A GAP THERE IN
TIME BETWEEN WHEN THIS PERSON
WAS DIAGNOSED WITH EBOLA AND,
SAY, WHEN A HAZMAT CREW GOT TO
THEIR HOUSE OR HAD TO QUARANTINE
THE FAMILY MEMBERS.
>> THERE IS A HISTORIC, VERY
STRONG RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OUR
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION, OUR C.D.C., AND THE
STATE AND LOCAL HEALTH
AUTHORITIES.
THEY TAKE THE SIGNALS FROM THE
C.D.C., THE C.D.C. SETS DOWN THE
GUIDELINES, AND, FOR EXAMPLE, AS
SOON AS THE CASE WAS IDENTIFIED
IN DALLAS, THE C.D.C. SENT AT
LEAST TEN HEALTH PROFESSIONALS
THERE AND LIKELY MORE TO COME TO
BE ABLE TO HELP IN THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THOSE
PROTOCOLS, PARTICULARLY THE
CONTACT TRACING PROTOCOLS.
SO, THERE REALLY IS VERY GOOD
INTERACTION BETWEEN THE NATIONAL
LEVEL C.D.C. AND THE LOCAL AND
STATE HEALTH AUTHORITIES.
>> Sreenivasan: WE HAD DR.
FRIEDEN ON THE NEWSHOUR JUST A
COUPLE OF NIGHTS AGO, WHERE HE
WAS SAYING REALLY THE BEST WAY
TO GET THIS IS TO GET IT AT THE
SOURCE IN AFRICA.
AND OBVIOUSLY A LOT OF PEOPLE
ARE CONCERNED ABOUT THE TRAVEL
AND THE FREE-FLOW OF PEOPLE AND
GOODS BACK AND FORTH.
SO, IS THERE ANYTHING WE CAN DO
TO IMPROVE THE LEVEL OF
QUARANTINE IN WEST AFRICA BEFORE
PEOPLE GET ONTO THE PLANES AND
GO WHEREVER THEY’RE GOING TO GO
IN THE WORLD?
>> WELL, THERE IS A PROCESS
GOING ON THAT VERY FEW PEOPLE
APPRECIATE.
IF YOU OR I WERE LET’S SAY IN
MONROVIA, LIBERIA, RIGHT NOW AT
THE AIRPORT, AND WE HAD A FEVER,
WHICH IS CHECKED FOR EVERYONE
THAT IS TRYING TO GET ONTO A
PLANE, WE WOULD NOT BE ABLE TO
GET ON A PLANE TO LEAVE LIBERIA
TO COME TO THE UNITED STATES OR
ANYPLACE ELSE.
SO, IT’S THE EXIT SCREENING FROM
THE COUNTRY WHICH REALLY PROVES
TO BE QUITE EFFECTIVE.
OBVIOUSLY, IF SOMEONE DOESN’T
HAVE SYMPTOMS AND DOESN’T HAVE A
FEVER AND IS IN THAT PHASE OF
INCUBATION WHERE THEY ARE
INFECTED AND THEY REALLY DON’T
KNOW THAT THEY’RE INFECTED,
THERE’S ALWAYS THE POSSIBILITY
THAT THAT WOULD SLIP THROUGH, AS
DID MR. THOMAS DUNCAN.
THE PROBLEM IS, HE WAS ALSO
ASKED A QUESTION AT THE EXIT
PART AS TO WHETHER HE HAD
CONTACT WITH A PERSON WITH
EBOLA, AND EITHER HE DIDN’T
REALIZE THAT HE DID OR I DON’T
KNOW WHAT THE ANSWER TO THAT IS,
BUT THAT SNUCK THROUGH.
THAT WILL HAPPEN.
BUT, ON THE OTHER END, WHEN A
PERSON DOES GET HERE, ONCE
THEY’RE IDENTIFIED, WE DO HAVE
THE PROTOCOLS TO DO THE KIND OF
IDENTIFICATION, ISOLATION,
PROTECTION OF HEALTH CARE
WORKERS AND CONTACT TRACING.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE ANY
PRACTICAL WAY TO KEEP ENTIRE
POPULATIONS OF WEST AFRICA IN
QUARANTINE FOR 21 DAYS BEFORE
THEY BOARD A PLANE?
>> AND THE ANSWER TO THAT IS NO.
AND I KNOW IT’S AN OBVIOUS
QUESTION THAT PEOPLE ASK.
I GET ASKED THAT ALL THE TIME,
AND TOM FRIEDEN FROM THE C.D.C.
GETS ASKED THAT ALL THE TIME.
IF YOU LOOK HISTORICALLY AT
TRYING TO ESSENTIALLY QUARANTINE
A COUNTRY, THE NEGATIVE EFFECTS
OF THAT REALLY OUTWEIGH ANY
POSITIVE BENEFIT.
IN FACT, HEALTH AUTHORITIES ARE
IN AGREEMENT THAT YOU CAN ALMOST
CERTAINLY HAVE A NEGATIVE EFFECT
BECAUSE YOU PREVENT THE FREE-
FLOW OF THINGS THAT THEY NEED TO
CONTAIN THE EPIDEMIC.
IT WOULD MAKE IT MUCH WORSE FOR
THEM.
AND AS WE’VE SAID, THE BEST WAY
TO PROTECT THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA IS TO COMPLETELY SHUT
DOWN THE EPIDEMIC IN WEST
AFRICA; NOT NECESSARILY TO
QUARANTINE ANYBODY IN WEST
AFRICA, BUT TO PUT INTO PLACE
THE INFECTION CONTROL METHODS
THAT WOULD ALLOW US TO BE ABLE
TO SUPPRESS THAT.
THAT’S THE BEST WAY TO PROTECT
THE UNITED STATES-- STOP IT IN
WEST AFRICA.
>> Sreenivasan: DR. ANTHONY
FAUCI, THANKS SO MUCH FOR YOUR
TIME.
>> GOOD TO BE WITH YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DOES THE
EBOLA VIRUS TRANSMIT FROM HUMAN
TO HUMAN?
READ OUR EXPLAINER AT
newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT MAJOR CYBER
ATTACK ON J.P. MORGAN CHASE WAS
APPARENTLY MUCH BIGGER THAN
PREVIOUSLY THOUGHT.
THE "NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTS
TODAY THAT ABOUT NINE OTHER
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS WERE ALSO
INFILTRATED BY THE SAME GROUP OF
OVERSEAS HACKERS.
ACCORDING TO THE ARTICLE, THE
HACKERS ARE THOUGHT TO BE
OPERATING IN RUSSIA.
THE ARTICLE QUOTES A SENIOR
AMERICAN OFFICIAL AS SPECULATING
THAT THE ATTACK COULD BE
RETALIATION FOR U.S. SANCTIONS
AGAINST RUSSIA.
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA IS ENDURING
ANOTHER DAY OF BRUTAL HEAT, WITH
THE MERCURY SOARING INTO TRIPLE
DIGITS IN SOME AREAS.
IT WAS MORE THAN 90 DEGREES
BEFORE NOON.
CALIFORNIA, OF COURSE, HAS ALSO
BEEN IN THE MIDST OF A HISTORIC
DROUGHT.
AND NEW NASA SATELLITE IMAGES
SHOW A DRAMATIC FALL-OFF IN THE
STATE’S RIVER BASINS SINCE 2002.
THE ORANGE AND RED COLORS SHOW
AREAS THAT HAVE LOST THE MOST
WATER OVER THE PAST 12 YEARS.
DEATHS FROM HEROIN OVERDOSES IN
THE U.S. MORE THAN DOUBLED FROM
2010 TO 2012, ACCORDING TO A NEW
REPORT FROM THE C.D.C.
BUT DEATHS ATTRIBUTED TO WHAT
ARE KNOWN AS OPIOID PRESCRIPTION
PAINKILLERS LIKE VICODIN AND
OXYCONTIN DECLINED DURING THE
SAME PERIOD.
OFFICIALS BELIEVE THE
AVAILABILITY OF HEROIN AND
TIGHTER REGULATIONS ON
PAINKILLERS ARE BEHIND THE
SHIFTING NUMBERS.
THAT SAID, THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE
DYING OF THESE PAINKILLER
OVERDOSES IS STILL MUCH HIGHER.
IN 2012, 3,700 PEOPLE DIED OF
HEROIN OVERDOSES, 9,900 PEOPLE
DIED FROM ABUSING OPIOIDS.
VOTER REGISTRATION IN FERGUSON,
MISSOURI, HAS SURGED IN THE
AFTERMATH OF THE KILLING OF AN
UNARMED BLACK TEENAGER BY A
WHITE POLICE OFFICER.
IT’S UP NEARLY 30%, ACCORDING TO
A BOARD OF ELECTIONS OFFICIAL.
AFTER DAYS OF SOMETIMES VIOLENT
PROTESTS, CIVIL RIGHTS LEADERS
HAD URGED RESIDENTS OF THE ST.
LOUIS SUBURB TO PARTICIPATE MORE
IN THE ELECTORAL PROCESS.
TWO-THIRDS OF FERGUSON’S 21,000
RESIDENTS ARE BLACK, BUT THE
POLICE AND CITY COUNCIL ARE
OVERWHELMINGLY WHITE.
CITY COUNCIL ELECTIONS IN
FERGUSON ARE NEXT SPRING.
IN THE FIRST OF ITS KIND
CEREMONY EVER HELD IN THE UNITED
STATES, A NUN FROM NEW JERSEY
HAS BEEN BEATIFIED.
SISTER MIRIAM TERESA, WHOSE
WRITINGS WERE CONSIDERED
INFLUENTIAL WITHIN THE CHURCH,
DIED IN 1927.
BUT 37 YEARS LATER, A BOY WITH
MACULAR DEGENERATION CLAIMED HIS
VISION WAS CURED ON THE VERY DAY
HE WAS GIVEN A RELIC OF THE LATE
NUN, INCLUDING A SINGLE STRAND
OF HER HAIR.
LAST DECEMBER, POPE FRANCIS
DECLARED THE EVENT A MIRACLE,
QUALIFYING HER FOR
BEATIFICATION.
SHE WOULD HAVE TO BE CREDITED
WITH ANOTHER MIRACLE TO ACHIEVE
SAINTHOOD.
TURNING OVERSEAS NOW, PRIME
MINISTER DAVID CAMERON AND
OTHERS REACTED WITH OUTRAGE
TODAY TO THE LATEST BEHEADING OF
A BRITISH CITIZEN BY THE
EXTREMIST ISLAMIC GROUP, ISIS.
VIDEO RELEASED SHOWED THE
KILLING OF A BRITISH AID WORKER,
ALAN HENNING.
SIMON ISRAEL OF BRITAIN’S
CHANNEL 4 HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: THE MANCHESTER
CAB DRIVER ALAN HENNING’S
HUMANITARIAN MISSION TO SYRIA
COULDN’T HAVE HAD A MORE
DESPERATE AND TRAGIC OUTCOME.
THE 47-YEAR-OLD’S BECOME THE
FOURTH HOSTAGE HELD BY ISIS TO
BE KILLED IN THE PAST 45 DAYS.
THE VIDEO OF HIS DEATH WAS
RECORDED AFTER THE COMMON
SANCTIONED AIRSTRIKES ON IRAQ.
IT HAS THE SAME BRITISH VOICE AS
THE OTHERS, ONLY THIS TIME WITH
A DIRECT MESSAGE TO THE PRIME
MINISTER.
>> Reporter: THERE HAD BEEN
REPEATED APPEALS TO SPARE HIS
LIFE.
HIS WIFE, BARBARA’S, WAS LESS
THAN A WEEK AGO.
>> I ASK ISLAMIC STATE, PLEASE
RELEASE HIM.
>> Reporter: REACTING TO HER
HUSBAND’S DEATH TONIGHT, SHE
SAID:
SAVING ALAN HENNING’S LIFE HAD
UNITED MUSLIM COMMUNITIES LIKE
NEVER BEFORE.
ONE OF HIS COLLEAGUES ON THAT
CONVOY TODAY DESCRIBED HIM AS
THE BEST OF THE BEST.
>> THE MOST AMAZING GUY I’VE
EVER MET, AND, YOU KNOW, I’VE--
I’VE REFRAINED FROM GIVING ANY
INTERVIEWS, ET CETERA, UP UNTIL
TODAY.
THE REASON WAS WE HAD THAT
GLIMMER OF HOPE.
SOMEBODY SAID QUITE BEAUTIFULLY
THAT ALAN’S A LIGHT.
THERE IS A LIGHT THAT’S BEEN PUT
OUT NOW.
>> Reporter: WITHIN THE LAST
TWO MONTHS, DESPERATE APPEALS
FROM THE FAMILIES OF THE
MURDERED HOSTAGES-- JAMES FOLEY,
STEVEN SOTLOFF, DAVID HAINES,
AND ALAN HENNING-- WERE IGNORED.
AND NOW, AS HAS BECOME THE
PRACTICE OF ISIS, AT THE END OF
MR. HENNING’S VIDEO, THE LIFE OF
ANOTHER HOSTAGE IS THREATENED.
HE’S PETER KASIG, EX-U.S.
MILITARY, NOW AN AID WORKER.
HIS FAMILY HAS RESPONDED THE
SAME WAY AS THE OTHERS, WITH
AN APPEAL.
>> WE IMPLORE THOSE WHO ARE
HOLDING YOU TO SHOW MERCY AND
USE THEIR POWER TO LET YOU GO.
>> Reporter: THEY, LIKE THE
OTHER FAMILIES, ARE HELPLESS, A
SITUATION ACKNOWLEDGED TODAY BY
THE PRIME MINISTER.
>> WELL, WHAT WE SEE WITH THIS
ORGANIZATION IS THAT THERE IS NO
LEVEL OF DEPRAVITY TO WHICH THEY
WILL NOT SINK.
NO APPEALS MADE ANY DIFFERENCE.
>> Reporter: BUT THAT WAS ALL
ALAN HENNING’S FAMILY COULD HANG
ON TO-- THE BELIEF THAT THEY
COULD MAKE A DIFFERENCE.
>> Sreenivasan: A KEY U.S. ALLY
IN THE FIGHT AGAINST ISIS,
PRESIDENT ERDOGAN OF TURKEY,
DEMANDED AND RECEIVED AN APOLOGY
FROM VICE PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN.
BIDEN SAID THURSDAY THAT ERDOGAN
HAD ADMITTED MAKING A MISTAKE BY
ALLOWING JIHADISTS FROM SYRIA TO
CROSS INTO TURKEY BECAUSE THEY
WERE FIGHTING PRESIDENT BASHAR
AL ASSAD’S REGIME.
ERDOGAN STATED TODAY HE SAID NO
SUCH THING AND ADDED TURKEY HAD
ACTUALLY PREVENTED 6,000
JIHADISTS FROM ENTERING THE
COUNTRY AND DEPORTED 1,000 MORE.
>> (translated): IF BIDEN HAS
USED SUCH EXPRESSIONS, HE WILL
BE HISTORY FOR ME.
WE HAVE NEVER PROVIDED HELP AND
SUPPORT TO ANY TERRORIST
ORGANIZATION-- I SAY TERRORIST
ORGANIZATION-- INCLUDING THE
ISLAMIST STATE.
NOBODY CAN PROVE OTHERWISE.
>> Sreenivasan: IN ASIA TODAY,
TOP OFFICIALS FROM NORTH KOREA
MET WITH THEIR COUNTERPARTS IN
THE SOUTH TODAY, THE HIGHEST
LEVEL FACE-TO-FACE TALKS BETWEEN
THE TWO NATIONS IN FIVE YEARS.
THE NORTH KOREAN DELEGATION MADE
A SURPRISE VISIT AT THE CLOSE OF
THE ASIA GAMES IN INCHEON, SOUTH
KOREA.
WHILE THERE WERE NO
BREAKTHROUGHS, THE MEETING
ITSELF MAY SIGNAL A COOLING OF
TENSIONS THAT HAVE FLARED IN
RECENT MONTHS.
THE COUNTRIES AGREED TO ANOTHER
HIGH-LEVEL MEETING LATER THIS
FALL.
IN HONG KONG, THOSE PRO-
DEMOCRACY PROTESTS CONTINUE TO
GROW DESPITE A NEW WARNING OF A
POSSIBLE CRACKDOWN.
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF PROTESTERS
GATHERED SATURDAY NIGHT DURING
ONE OF THE LARGEST RALLIES SINCE
THE PROTESTS BEGAN MORE THAN A
WEEK AGO.
HONG KONG’S CHIEF EXECUTIVE,
LEUNG CHUN-YING, DEMANDED TODAY
THAT THE PROTESTORS DISBAND BY
MONDAY MORNING.
LEUNG SAID ALL ACTIONS NECESSARY
WOULD BE TAKEN TO RESTORE ORDER.
ADDITIONALLY, POLICE ANNOUNCED
THAT SOME OF THE 19 MEN ARRESTED
FOR ATTACKING THE PROTESTERS HAD
LINKS TO GANGS IN HONG KONG.
DEMONSTRATORS ACCUSED THE
GOVERNMENT OF ENCOURAGING THE
ATTACKS.
SWEDEN WILL BECOME THE FIRST
WESTERN EUROPEAN NATION TO
RECOGNIZE AN INDEPENDENT
PALESTINIAN STATE.
THIS ACCORDING TO THE NATION’S
NEWLY ELECTED PRIME MINISTER.
TODAY, SWEDEN’S FOREIGN MINISTER
EXPLAINED THE MOVE.
>> WE BELIEVE THAT THIS IS AN
IMPORTANT STEP TOWARDS A TWO-
STATE SOLUTION.
WE HOPE THAT THIS WILL INSPIRE
AND HOPEFULLY GIVE SOME NEW
ENERGY INTO THE NEGOTIATIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: A U.S. STATE
DEPARTMENT SPOKESPERSON CALLED
THE DECISION "PREMATURE."
AND THE FORMER PRESIDENT OF
HAITI, JEAN CLAUDE DUVALIER,
COMMONLY KNOWN AS BABY DOC, HAS
DIED.
DUVALIER RULED THE COUNTRY FOR
15 YEARS BEFORE BEING FORCED TO
FLEE HAITI IN 1986 FOLLOWING
ACCUSATIONS OF CORRUPTION AND
HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES.
HE RETURNED TO HAITI IN 2011.
BABY DOC DIED OF A HEART ATTACK.
HE WAS 63.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN AUTHOR J.K.
ROWLING RELEASED HER FIRST
"HARRY POTTER" BOOK IN 1997, SHE
DIDN’T JUST INTRODUCE THE WORLD
TO A NEW CHARACTER; SHE HELPED
EXPAND A CATEGORY OF BOOKS THAT
HAS TURNED INTO AN IMPORTANT
PROFIT CENTER FOR THE PUBLISHING
INDUSTRY.
WE’RE TALKING ABOUT WHAT’S KNOWN
AS YOUNG ADULT LITERATURE.
IN FACT, ITS POPULARITY ALSO HAS
BEEN FUELED BY READERS IN THEIR
20s, 30s AND 40s, AND BY
HOLLYWOOD’S EMBRACE.
THE NEWSHOUR’S TRACY WHOLF GIVES
YOU A GLIMPSE AT SOME OF THE
BOOKS YOUR CHILDREN OR
GRANDCHILDREN MIGHT BE READING.
>> Reporter: THESE DAYS, YOU
DON’T HAVE TO BE A PARENT TO BE
FAMILIAR WITH POPULAR TEEN BOOK
TITLES LIKE "HARRY POTTER," "THE
HUNGER GAMES" OR "TWILIGHT."
THESE TITLES HAVE SOLD MILLIONS
OF COPIES OF BOOKS AND SPAWNED
MERCHANDISE EMPIRES, BEEN
ADAPTED INTO BLOCKBUSTER FILMS,
AND HAVE PERMEATED OUR POP-
CULTURE LIVES.
YOUNG ADULT LITERATURE IS A
BOOMING BUSINESS AND HAS BEEN
ONE OF THE FASTEST GROWING BOOK
CATEGORIES FOR PUBLISHERS IN
RECENT YEARS WITH MORE THAN 715
MILLION BOOKS SOLD IN 2013.
>> AS FAR AS I CAN TELL, A YOUNG
ADULT NOVEL IS A REGULAR NOVEL
THAT PEOPLE ACTUALLY READ.
(LAUGHTER)
>> Reporter: EVEN THOUGH THE
CATEGORY IS AIMED AT AUDIENCES
AGES 12 TO 18, MORE NON-
TEENAGERS ARE PICKING UP THESE
TITLES.
IN FACT, A 2014 REPORT SHOWED
THAT 77% OF YOUNG ADULT
LITERATURE BUYERS WERE ACTUALLY
ADULTS, WITH THE LARGEST SEGMENT
OF BUYERS, 43%, AGES 18 TO 29.
AND GIVEN THE DIFFICULT ECONOMIC
CLIMATE THE PUBLISHING INDUSTRY
HAS FACED OVER THE LAST FEW
YEARS, MORE Y.A. OR "YOUNG
ADULT" BUYERS HAVE BEEN A
BLESSING.
WHERE DOES Y.A. FIT INTO THIS?
HAVE THEY BEEN INFLUENTIAL IN
HELPING BOLSTER THE PUBLISHING
INDUSTRY AS THEY’VE TRIED TO
WEATHER THESE ROUGH WATERS?
>> YOUNG ADULT’S BEEN REALLY
CRUCIAL IN THAT IT’S REALLY
PROVIDED SOME OF THE BIGGEST
BLOCKBUSTER SERIES AND TITLES
OVER THE LAST FIVE OR TEN YEARS.
>> Reporter: JIM MILLIOT IS THE
EDITORIAL DIRECTOR OF
"PUBLISHER’S WEEKLY," A TRADE
MAGAZINE THAT TRACKS PUBLISHING
TRENDS AND BUSINESS.
HOW DID Y.A. CHANGE THE TIDE FOR
THE PUBLISHING INDUSTRY?
>> WELL, IT PROVIDED A STEADY
STREAM OF REVENUE FOR THE
CHILDREN’S MARKET.
"HUNGER GAMES," FOR INSTANCE.
A COUPLE YEARS AGO, THERE WERE
OVER 65 MILLION COPIES IN PRINT.
>> Reporter: AIMEE FRIEDMAN IS
AN EXECUTIVE EDITOR AND AUTHOR
AT SCHOLASTIC PUBLISHING, THE
LARGEST PUBLISHER AND
DISTRIBUTOR OF CHILDREN’S BOOKS
IN THE WORLD.
THE COMPANY ALSO HAPPENS TO
PUBLISH THE "HARRY POTTER" AND
"HUNGER GAMES" SERIES.
WHY DO YOU THINK Y.A. IS SO
POPULAR WITH ADULTS?
>> YOU KNOW, Y.A. TOUCHES UPON
REALLY TIMELESS, UNIVERSAL
ISSUES THAT... THAT TEENS GO
THROUGH.
FIRST LOVE, FIRST CRUSH,
HEARTACHE, FAMILY ISSUES,
CHALLENGING AUTHORITY.
AND ADULTS REMEMBER THAT.
AND ALSO, THE STORIES TEND TO BE
INCREDIBLY GRIPPING AND
COMPELLING.
THEY SORT OF GRAB YOU FROM THE
START.
AND ADULTS LOVE THAT, TOO.
WHO DOESN’T LOVE THAT?
>> Reporter: AUTHOR LOIS LOWRY
KNOWS A FEW THINGS ABOUT WRITING
FOR YOUNG ADULTS, HAVING PENNED
45 BOOKS FOR YOUNG AUDIENCES
SINCE 1977 AND WINNING NUMEROUS
AWARDS FOR HER WORK.
>> SO, A LOT OF VERY FINE
WRITERS ARE ENTERING THAT FIELD.
IN THE OLD DAYS, THEY MIGHT HAVE
LOOKED DOWN THEIR NOSE AND FELT
THAT ONLY ADULT WORK MATTERED,
BUT THAT’S NO LONGER TRUE.
>> Reporter: TITLES SUCH AS "THE
HUNGER GAMES" AND "DIVERGENT"
WERE DERIVATIVE OF LOWRY’S 1994
NEWBERRY AWARD-WINNING NOVEL
"THE GIVER," WHICH WAS RELEASED
AS A $25 MILLION HOLLYWOOD
ADAPTATION THIS PAST SUMMER.
BUT LIKE MANY BOOK-TO-FILM
ADAPTATIONS, WHAT YOU SEE ON
THE SCREEN ISN’T EXACTLY WHAT
LOWRY PENNED 20 YEARS AGO.
TO BROADEN THE FILM’S APPEAL,
PRODUCERS ADDED MORE ACTION,
CONFLICT AND ROMANCE.
>> TODAY’S LITERATURE FOR YOUNG
PEOPLE IS MUCH MORE EDGY.
THERE’S A LOT OF SEXUAL
EXPLICITNESS NOW.
BUT ALSO-- AND THIS TROUBLES ME
A BIT-- THERE’S A LOT OF
VIOLENCE.
>> Reporter: BOOKS LIKE "THE
HUNGER GAMES" AND "THE GIVER"
ARE BOTH EXAMPLES OF A POPULAR
YOUNG ADULT GENRE CALLED"
DYSTOPIAN LITERATURE,"
FICTIONAL STORIES SET IN DARK,
FUTURISTIC SOCIETIES WHERE THE
PROTAGONIST IS AT ODDS WITH THE
WORLD AROUND HIM OR HER.
>> THEY DO SAY THAT "THE GIVER"
WAS THE FIRST FOR WHAT THEY CALL
YOUNG ADULTS.
AND NOW, OF COURSE, EVERY OTHER
BOOK IS DYSTOPIAN LITERATURE.
I THINK PUBLISHERS ARE GETTING A
LITTLE TIRED OF IT.
THEY’RE LOOKING FOR THE NEXT
TREND.
>> Reporter: AND IT APPEARS THAT
A NEW TREND IS ALREADY APPARENT
ON THE SHELVES OF BOOKSTORES
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
>> NOWADAYS, IF I REALLY HAD TO
GUESS OR PINPOINT SOMETHING, I
WOULD SAY THE PENDULUM IS
SWINGING TOWARD SORT OF "JOHN
GREEN LIT," AS PEOPLE CALL IT--
CONTEMPORARY, REALISTIC STORIES
ABOUT TEENS FACING EVERYDAY
THINGS IN THEIR LIVES.
>> Reporter: YOUNG ADULT AUTHOR
JOHN GREEN’S "THE FAULT IN OUR
STARS," A TEENAGE TEAR-JERKER
ABOUT YOUNG LOVERS BATTLING
CANCER, HAS BEEN A JUGGERNAUT
FOR THE INDUSTRY, SELLING MORE
THAN TEN MILLION COPIES AND
GROSSING MORE THAN $300 MILLION
WORLDWIDE WHEN IT WAS RELEASED
AS A FILM THIS PAST SUMMER, A
TREND THAT MIGHT PLEASE LOWRY.
>> YOU HAVE TO TELL A GOOD
STORY, AND YOU HAVE TO CREATE
CHARACTERS THAT A YOUNG ADULT
AUDIENCE WILL CARE ABOUT AND
WILL FOLLOW ALONG, TURNING
PAGES, TURNING PAGES.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: IN RECENT
WEEKS, ALMOST EVERY BIT OF NEWS
OUT OF AFRICA HAS BEEN ABOUT THE
OUTBREAK OF EBOLA.
BEFORE THAT, THE CAPTURE OF
HUNDREDS OF SCHOOL GIRLS BY BOKO
HARAM MILITANTS.
NOW SOME PHOTOJOURNALISTS ARE
USING INSTAGRAM TO TRY TO DEPICT
A FULLER VERSION OF LIFE ON THAT
CONTINENT.
SASKIA DE MELKER REPORTS.
>> Reporter: A WOMAN HANGING
LAUNDRY IN UGANDA.
YOUNG MEN AT A BARBER SHOP IN
GHANA.
CHEERLEADERS AT A ZIMBABWE
SOCCER MATCH.
THESE ARE THE IMAGES THE
PHOTOGRAPHER NAAN KOFI ACQUAH
SAYS JOURNALISTS RARELY DOCUMENT
DURING THEIR ASSIGNMENTS ACROSS
AFRICA.
>> TRADITIONALLY, IF YOU SEND A
JOURNALIST, PHOTOJOURNALIST,
WRITER, TO AFRICA, YOU GAVE THEM
AN ASSIGNMENT-- GO AND
PHOTOGRAPH FAMINE IN SUDAN.
SO WHEN THEY ARE ARRIVING IN
SUDAN, THEIR CAMERA BAG IS
PACKED UNTIL THEY SEE THE FIRST
MALNOURISHED CHILD.
THAT’S WHEN THEY SEE THE STORY.
EVERYTHING ELSE DOESN’T MATTER.
>> Reporter: BUT ACQUAH IS ONE
OF A CORE GROUP OF ABOUT 20
PHOTOJOURNALISTS FROM ACROSS THE
CONTINENT WHO SHARE CANDID
IMAGES OF THE MUNDANE AND
THE NORMAL.
THESE IMAGES OF PART OF AN
INSTAGRAM-BASED PROJECT STARTED
BY TWO PHOTOJOURNALISTS IN 2012
CALLED "EVERYDAY AFRICA."
IT’S NOW FUNDED BY ORGANIZATIONS
INCLUDING THE PULITZER CENTER
AND OPEN SOCIETY FOUNDATION, AND
IT HAS ATTRACTED OVER 100,000
FOLLOWERS.
>> PEOPLE SEE A PHOTO OF MY KIDS
PLAYING WITH AN iPAD, AND
THEY’RE LIKE, "OH, KIDS
IN AFRICA HAVE iPADS?"
AND THAT IS THE DISCOURSE WE
NEED TO HAVE.
>> Reporter: THE PROJECT ISN’T
NECESSARILY ABOUT TAKING
ATTENTION AWAY FROM AFRICA’S
HARDSHIP, SAYS ACQUAH, BUT
RATHER PAINTING A MORE COMPLETE
PICTURE OF THE AFRICAN
EXPERIENCE.
>> I’M NOT AN ADVOCATE FOR
PUSHING ONLY POSITIVE IMAGES
BECAUSE THAT BECOMES PROPAGANDA.
BUT IN THE BIGGER SCALE OF
THINGS, THE POSITIVITY, THE
LAUGHTER, THE WARMNESS, THE
HUMANITY, THE JOY, THE
EXPERIENCES FAR OUTWEIGH THE
NEGATIVES.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT’S IT FOR
THIS EDITION OF PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
I’M HARI SREENIVASAN.
GOOD NIGHT.